Today I strengthened my understanding of Java multithreading by working with Runnable, lambda expressions, and thread lifecycle control using start() and join(). I clearly saw how thread scheduling leads to unpredictable execution order and why separating a task from its execution is a best practice.

I explored race conditions through a shared counter example and understood why counter++ is not atomic. I observed inconsistent results despite waiting for threads to finish and learned that coordination of execution does not imply thread safety. I gained clarity on shared mutable state, atomicity, and the need for proper synchronization.

Today’s learning was focused on consolidating modern Java concepts and bridging them into Scala 2, with a strong emphasis on functional programming, immutability, and backend-relevant patterns.
Rather than covering breadth, the goal was conceptual alignment and readiness.

🔹 Java Concepts Reinforced
1. Java Collections Framework

Revisited List, Set, and Map with implementation details:

ArrayList, HashSet, HashMap

Emphasized programming to interfaces over implementations

Clear understanding of:

Uniqueness guarantees in Set

Key replacement behavior in Map

Order guarantees (or lack thereof)

Iteration strategies:

Iterator

Enhanced for

entrySet() vs keySet() (preferred for key–value access)

2. Sorting & Comparators

Implemented custom sorting logic using Comparator

Refactored anonymous classes into lambda expressions

Understood and corrected Comparator contract violations

Clarified roles of:

Comparable → natural ordering

Comparator → external, flexible ordering

3. Java Streams API

Shifted from imperative loops to functional pipelines

Built complete pipelines using:

filter, map, reduce

Primitive streams (mapToInt().sum())

Key takeaways:

Streams are lazy

Streams are single-use

Intermediate vs terminal operations

Streams do not mutate the source

Example (Java):

int result = nums.stream()
    .filter(n -> n % 2 == 0)
    .mapToInt(n -> n * 3)
    .sum();

🔹 Scala 2 Foundations (Day-0)

Scala was approached as a natural extension of Java 8+ functional concepts, not as a completely new language.

Core Concepts Covered

val vs var → immutability by default

def vs function values

if as an expression

Collections: List, Seq

Functional operations: map, filter, reduce

case class as a replacement for Java POJOs

Option instead of null / Optional

Example (Scala):

val result =
  nums.filter(_ % 2 == 0)
      .map(_ * 3)
      .sum

🔁 Java ↔ Scala Concept Mapping
Java	Scala
Stream API	Collection operations
Optional<T>	Option[T]
POJO	case class
Mutable by default	Immutable by default
null checks	Type-safe absence

This mapping significantly reduced the learning curve and improved confidence.

🧠 Key Learnings

Functional programming improves clarity and safety by reducing mutation.

Java Streams serve as an excellent mental bridge to Scala collections.

Understanding data flow is more important than syntax memorization.

Scala feels complex only until JVM and functional parallels are recognized.

🎯 Interview Insights
Java Collections

Prefer interfaces over concrete implementations

Use Set for uniqueness, Map for fast lookups

HashMap replaces values for duplicate keys

entrySet() iteration is more efficient than repeated get()

Sorting

Comparator must obey symmetry, transitivity, and equality

Always handle equality (return 0)

Prefer lambda-based comparators in modern Java

Java uses TimSort (O(n log n))

Streams

Streams are lazy and single-use

map transforms data, forEach introduces side effects

Prefer primitive streams to avoid boxing

Streams describe what to compute, not how

Scala (Internship-Relevant)

Emphasis on immutability and expressions

Strong type inference with concise syntax

Functional operations are first-class
